a consultant or a reviewer for proposals or a
member of an ad hoc panel, something like that. But
I've never actually worked for NSF.
No. Okay. What about the political goals of IDOE?
Oh, that's a hard one. I think there must have been
several, and I'm inferring a lot of it, but you will
remember that it was, the whole theme was
suggested by, I guess, Vice President Humphrey.
And it was initiated at a time when funding for
research was beginning to slip. And there was a
general dampening of the role that science and
technology were playing in society. There was
also an awareness on the part of some number of
people that we were going to get into trouble on
things like Law of the Sea. And I think, I don't know
this, but I assume that some of the motivation here
was to try to bring together the scientific
communities of the various countries, including
the developing countries. and emphasize what can
be achieved by a common coordinated effort with
some cooperative research programs like this big
upwelling program. Now, there may have been a
variety of other political motives that I will
never know about. I'm sure there were, but I don't,
I can't speak to them. Well, how does, how does
biological oceanography fit into the IDOE
program?
Well, in several of the subsections, living
resources primarily, but also in environmental
quality, there are biological programs designed
either to give us some feel for the problems of
coastal pollution, oceanic pollution, plus in
the living resources program, the whole theme,
well, no, not the whole theme, But the primary
program there is CUEA, Coastal Upwelling, which
I'm sure you're aware is designed to determine the
role of the deeper nutrient-rich waters in
contributing to growth of phytoplankton,
zooplankton, fish, and then turning it into a
natural resource. But other than that, many of the
programs are physical, chemical, geological. Is
the IDOE truly an international venture?
It may now have evolved into an international
venture, but I think it's stretching it. If you
look at the reports from IDOE,
you will see some number of institutions
representing some number of countries that are
involved in various programs. And in that sense it
is international. Now it did not even, it evolved
that way though. It didn't start out that way. Even
though the I in IDOE has always been there. It took a
number of years for other scientists from other
countries to convince their own governments that
they should be involved and to get the funding to be
involved and So it is now, yeah. And more or less,
depending on the program itself, there are some
that are strictly international. The Quay
program is very strongly internationally
oriented.
As a scientist, if I may ask this broad question,
I'll find AOE. What is your opinion of pollution of
the coastal waters? Do you see this as an immediate
danger? You see the ocean is able to absorb more
waste?
In spite of what Cousteau says, the ocean can
absorb more waste, but to me that's not the
problem. The most productive area of the ocean in
terms of man and resources is the coastal area and
the estuarine area. If you continue to dump just
about everything that you don't want into that
area, sure, in time, the ocean will absorb it. But
in so doing, it will destroy some number of the
natural resources on which we depend. In this
state, it's a perfect example. In 1920, there was
something like 5,000 acres of shell fishing
waters prohibited or closed because of
pollution. In 1975, it was just under 800,000
acres. And how many more hundreds of thousands of
acres can we afford to close before we don't have
any shell fishing or shrimp or anything else? And
it'll just move out into the offshore waters if we
continue to do it.
Do you favor, in effect, governmental
interference? I favor... correcting the
situation, and since private individuals and
industries do not seem capable of doing it
themselves, we have no recourse but to fall back on
the government. Now, do you see any future for such
things as aquaculture in marine coastal waters?
Well, unfortunately, the word has been so misused
by the politicians and in part by some sections of
the scientific community. Originally, there
were those who said that this would be a method by
which we could feed the starving millions of the
world. And it was on that theme that the
politicians sold it. And now, it has not done that,
and it will not do that. The Japanese have been
quite successful in culturing shrimp, but the
price of shrimp make it strictly an affluent diet.
And people have ventured into this without very
sound scientific approaches, and many of the
efforts, even on the part of private
corporations, have been disastrous because they
didn't lay the foundation. They were in such a
hurry to make the quick buck. With good planning
and sensible arrangement of
species that can be cultured, should be cultured,
I think it could be a very profitable industry, but
it will never feed the starving millions of the
world. Now as an expert on crustaceans, do you see
possibly your future role in oceanography is
involved in some kind of aquaculture? Not really.
I see my role continuing much as it has been to
provide the basic understanding of development
of crustaceans, the techniques for culturing
them under laboratory conditions to determine
what environmental parameters contribute to
survival and good development. And then it's up to
a second group to take it and develop this into a
pilot commercial venture on a scale big enough to
make it worthwhile. then presumably a third group
private enterprise to pick it up and make it pay but
it's not my role as a professor at duke university
to do it for a private industry all right do you uh
then possibly feel that that the move towards
mission-oriented research with such people as
onr and to a lesser extent with nsf do you do you feel
that that uh will discourage work such as yours,
which is not mission oriented. It already has made
it far more difficult for people to obtain support
for basic research. And the irony of it, which I
conveyed to Senator Weikert several months ago,
is that while in the realm of oceanography we are
being told to slant our research more and more
toward applied work, we're spending billions to
determine if there is life on Mars. Well, isn't
that basic? There's no possible application.
There's an awful lot of inconsistency here.
Besides Senator Weicker, Senator Humphrey, for
example, is well known for his concept of basic
research in oceanography and his support of
oceanographic institutions. Can you think of any
other senators or congressmen, other than your
own state, who have been sympathetic? Well, I
wouldn't include my own state. I don't know that my
two senators would know the meaning of the word.
You can put that on the record. Senator Magnuson
has been for, I don't know, 20 years, I think, one of
the better known senators relative to
oceanography. Senator Pell, Rhode Island, who
conceived the Sea Grant Program. Senator
Hollings from South Carolina. Those are the three
names that really come to mind immediately in the
Senate.
And there may be others, but they
have not played the role that those three have. And
Weikert, of course, is trying, but he's a
relatively junior senator.
Now, how does the National Academy of Science
contribute to the Oceanographic Institute?
Well, that's a good one.
Well, they do a number of things, such as reviews of
programs, which hopefully influence the
Congress and the government executive as to
trends in science, things that need to be done,
things that need to be corrected.
And they encourage the
open discussion of areas that need to be looked at.
And, of course, in the realm of international
science, they, I guess, play a major role.
Unfortunately, with the Soviet Union, this has
not evolved properly. But other than that, they
do. Now, would you elaborate some of that
statement, please? I'm not sure I understand it in
terms of the Soviet Union. Well, in 73, you may
remember that ex-President Nixon and Mr. Bryson
have signed a number of agreements for
cooperative research programs. One of them is in
the realm of oceanography, entitled Biological
Productivity and Biochemistry of the World's
Oceans, a typical Russian title. Somehow,
within the organizational scheme, NOAA emerged
as the lead agency. And in the working group that
was pulled together to coordinate the thing, you
have representation from NOAA, NSF, ONR, and
academia. But at no point is the academy involved.
And the sad part of it is that the Academy has
tremendous experience, more than any of the other
ones put together in the realm of international
science.
The Soviet version of the working groups works
through the Academy of the Soviet Union. And you
can tell from discussions with the Soviet
scientists that they don't understand why it is
that the Academy has been ignored. Normally it's
an academy-academy relationship. But here they
find themselves talking from the side of the
Soviet Academy to a bunch of government agencies.
Well, what happened to the Academy? And I've
written to Phil Handler about it, and he, I think,
agrees that the Academy could play a very
effective role in all of this, but they've just
been completely left out. What types of research
in marine biology did the NSF tend to encourage or
tend to favor? You said did or? Does. Does. I don't
know that they encourage or favor any of it
actively.
At least on paper, a person can submit a proposal
directly to NSF. where it is shunted into some
appropriate subsection, where it is presumably
reviewed by your peers. And if it is meritorious on
original research, you have a reasonable chance
of getting some funding, usually not what you ask
for, but some. But I don't know that with the
exception of IDOE, that NSF has ever encouraged a
particular line of research, as opposed to IRDA,
ONR, EPA, where they know the areas in which they
wish to support research. And if yours falls
within that area, fine. If it doesn't fall within
that area, they return the proposal.
Then you would say about the National Academy of
Sciences then, I suppose, the same thing? They've
tended not to favor a particular kind of research?
Oh, they don't. Right. And of course, they don't
fund any research. That's right. I was wondering
in passing judgments on proposals. I'm not aware
that they even pass judgment on proposals. I would
never send a proposal for research support to the
academy. I would get it back within three days,
saying that this is not their function. I have
phrased that poorly. In offering advice to
sciences, have they tended to favor one
particular? No. No. They may in, well, okay, here
is a academy document, which I was involved with,
biological oceanography, some critical issues,
problems, and recommendations. Okay, this is an
official publication of the academy brought
together by a group of U.S. scientists
recommending that certain areas should be
considered emphasized or de-emphasized. And To
that extent, the academy does provide some
guidance, but that's all. Now, do you see any
trends in terms of research and courage now, or
approaches in oceanography that have changed the
nature of the discipline in the last several years
or so? Yeah, primarily in the form of IDOE. We are
very possibly at a threshold. where there will be a
good deal of discussion about managed research,
big research teams, as opposed to the individual
who sits in his ivory tower and thinks. And I will
not be at all surprised if in the next five years we
hear more and more about the merits of managed
research and research teams versus individual
research. Do you approve of managed research and
research teams?
Well, there are certain problems which can only be
resolved through large-scale efforts. And any
time you get a large-scale effort, somebody
better manage it. Now, let me approach that
question from a different way. I have heard
several of your colleagues complain about
project funding. maintaining that they liked it
better when a lump sum was given to an institution
like Scripps Institution of Oceanography or
Texas A&M Department of Oceanography, and then it
was parceled out from that institution really to
encourage individual research within the
institution. Would you agree with that
assessment? I'm totally opposed to it,
primarily. because this is the system that has
been in effect for years in most European
institutions. And it assumes that the professor,
or whoever it happens to be that has the control
over that pot of money, is totally objective,
totally unbiased, and is sufficiently well
informed on all realms of science that he can
decide where the emphasis in terms of support
should be placed. And all those assumptions are
usually incorrect. If you do it the way NSF has done
it for 25 years,
an individual who has a good idea but may be out of
favor with his boss that week still gets a fair
hearing through his peers who are in a position to
have a far better overview of science than one man.
So that the block funding for certain things, like
the operation of research vessels, that's fine.
But to promote, encourage, and fund research,
it's disastrous.
Now, I want to move away now from specific
questions about grant giving agencies or
overseeing agencies and move into, if I could, the
military. Why is NATO becoming involved in
environmental studies?
I assume because it's the thing to do. What is your
role with these environmental studies? Well, I'm
no longer involved with NATO. Right. I know you're
not, but what was your role then and... Well, I
never really... I wasn't with them long enough to
find out because I got fired. Oh, how did... Within
the first year of my appointment to that
subcommittee, some number of meetings were
scheduled and rescheduled and canceled and
rescheduled and recanceled. And without really
realizing it, I wound up attending, I guess, one of
four. Shortly thereafter, I received a very
official letter indicating that according to
section 2B, subsection 4, 7, and so forth, Anyone
who did not participate in more than two meetings
in any one year was relieved of his position. I
wrote back and told him that anyone who ran the show
the way they did was expecting an awful lot from a
scientist who had anything else to do to be able to
drop everything he was doing tomorrow and come to
Brussels, and that they had never appraised me of
my rights before they appointed me. But I decided
there wasn't any point in making any issue of it.
They can run their show the way they want to, and
I'll run mine the way I want to. So I don't have any
real overview of what the NATO environmental
program is, should be, or otherwise. Okay. Then I
should like to approach the question in terms of
international experience. Is environmental
concerns or environmental concerns becoming
important internationally? Oh, undoubtedly.
Okay. Are they being discussed at international
meetings with regularity? Definitely.
Is there any consensus on an environmental
approach to the oceans?
Well, I think at the level of theory, there is a
great deal of consensus. Where you get in trouble
is that Beyond the theory, you get involved in what
is practical, what is politically feasible. And
even though a scientist from, say, a developing
country feels that in theory his government is not
devoting the time and attention and support to
environmental concern, he has very little
control over it. When he goes home, he may be told to
shut up.
There is definitely concern, and we're beginning
to see the development of things like a
Mediterranean pollution program, a Red Sea
pollution program. Now, these are not very large
oceans, admittedly, but it's a start. What
threats are considered the most imminent threats
to the ocean internationally? Well, I think
petroleum is top of the list. Now, radioisotopes.
long ago were recognized as being a real common
threat. And it's one of the examples in the
development of the nuclear age that I think we tend
to forget about before they ever got to be a threat.
The scientific communities and governments of
the participating countries got together and did
a very good job of making certain that there were
established techniques and procedures to do
everything possible to reduce the chances of a
real spill which would contaminate for thousands
of years some of the ocean. So it can be done. Now, I
have three questions I already have written out
concerning those exact two ideas, all right?
First of all, what is your opinion of offshore
drilling? It's obviously going to occur. Do we
need more controls, less controls? Is it safe
enough?
Like everything else that man does, there is a
calculated risk. And the best we can hope for is
that if within that percent of error, when that
percent of error shows up, which it's bound to,
that we are properly informed as to how to deal with
it. And that's where science comes into the
picture. But there's absolutely nothing we are
going to do to interfere with it. It's like this BLM
fiasco.
And nuclear plants then? Same way. Same way. Does
it, do you feel uneasy as a scientist when
referendums are asked on such things as nuclear
plants and offshore drilling? Well, in
democracy, I guess it's the only way to go. But the
vast majority of people who are voting, including
myself, are not well enough informed on the
technology and the science to make a good
objective decision. It's all too frequently a gut
decision. And I was very surprised that the
California referendum came out the way it did. It
suggests that more people than we admit accept the
fact that there is only so much energy. And when
we've used it up, we're going to have to go
someplace else. which, as a matter of fact, leads
me to the third question. I have inferred from what
you've said, and I mean to imply it, that you think
nuclear plants are a viable alternative for
states like North Carolina and so forth around the
seas. What about nuclear waste? Do you have any
opinions on that, since that's one of those things
discussed internationally? Well, my only
opinion would be strictly that, that it will
undoubtedly pose a threat And the science and
technology that's involved has a real problem.
They're going to have to find how to deal with it.
But I guess I have sufficient faith in science and
technology to think that they will. And if we do
with it what we have done with other things
intelligently, we will find a very productive use
for it.
How closely are the United States and Soviet Union
working together in oceanography today? We are
beginning to work, I think, quite well within the
constraints that are imposed upon us by politics.
In the program that I'm involved in, as an example,
we have met as a group twice, once in Moscow in
December of 74, once here at Beaufort in May of 76,
and we're scheduled to go to meet in Moscow in
January of 77. And you can already see the
beginnings of freer discussions between the
Soviet scientists and the US scientists. And I am
constantly reminding some of my more skeptical
colleagues that they forget that these two
communities have not talked to each other in 50
years. And you cannot gauge the success of the
U.S.-Soviet venture as if it were a similar
program between Great Britain and the United
States, where we've been talking since the
Revolution. But I am encouraged by the way it's
beginning to develop.
What sort of things are you talking about
internationally? Voyages? Well, in this
biological productivity program, we started out
with the traditional document which outlined
some number of general broad areas where we feel
cooperation would be possible and useful to both
countries. Then, within these seven or eight
subsections, Individual scientists are
developing in greater detail the provisions for a
number of things, the exchange of scientists.
First, the idea being you've got to get to know the
other guy if you're going to plan any sort of a
cooperative research program. Exchange in terms
of not just a week or so, but for a longer period of
time so that U.S. scientists can work in Soviet
laboratories, Soviet scientists can work in U.S.
laboratories.